# Part 2 - The Investigation of the Distribution of Loans from Prosper Loan Data

###  _by Abdullah Akintobi_

## Dataset

This document explores a dataset containing 113,937 loans with 81 variables on each loan, including loan amount, borrower rate (or interest rate), current loan status, borrower income, and many others. You can download the dataset [here](https://s3.amazonaws.com/udacity-hosted-downloads/ud651/prosperLoanData.csv). This [data dictionary](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/ccc?key%3D0AllIqIyvWZdadDd5NTlqZ1pBMHlsUjdrOTZHaVBuSlE%26usp%3Dsharing&sa=D&source=editors&ust=1665220514781400&usg=AOvVaw0mbCX0QoSuKKEAgUIcVFbb) explains all the variables in the dataset. I will not explore all of the variables in the dataset. I focused my exploration on 12 of them. All the variables I involved in my analysis are "LoanNumber", "Term", "LoanStatus", "BorrowerRate", "BorrowerState", "IncomeVerifiable", "StatedMonthlyIncome", "LoanOriginalAmount", "LoanOriginationDate", "LoanOriginationQuarter", "MonthlyLoanPayment" and "Investors". Eight Hundred Seventy-one duplicated data points were removed from the dataset.


## Summary of Findings

First, I started with Univariate Exploration to investigate distributions of individual variables. The "LoanStatus" variable has similar categories so I put all loan statuses that are past due to just "Past Due" to make my visualization more readable. I will explain my observations as follows. In the "StatedMonthlyIncome" variable, I noticed that there are lots of outliers. As a result, I investigated further to discover that most of the Borrower's Stated Monthly Income were incorrect. For instance, how could an individual who makes $1,750,002 per month borrow a loan of $4000 and find it difficult to pay back the loan over a long time (row 53167 in the dataset)? There are also probably other false monthly incomes but I only replaced the $1,750,002 monthly income with $175,000. I didn't change other outliers because I don't have enough evidence to back them up but the $1,750,002 income is too deceitful. The "StatedMonthlyIncome", "LoanOriginalAmount" and "MonthlyLoanPayment" variables took on a large range of values, so I looked at the data using a log transform. In the "LoanOriginationQuarter" variable I change the values from "Quarter Year" format to "Year Quarter" (i.e. Q4 2005 to 2005 Q4). I also created a dataframe called Quarter_df to plot a line graph of the Loan Origination Quarter. I also used a log transformation on the "Investors" variable. Under the transformation, the data indicate a mode of 1.

Secondly, I moved on to Bivariate Exploration to investigate relationships between pairs of variables in the data. The relationships observed in the Bivariate investigation and how the features of interest vary with one another. An objective of this investigation is to ascertain how the loan given out by the loan company was distributed. In addition, we will be able to see how the loan's original amount and borrower rate change with time. I will explain my observations as follows. Loan Original Amount and Monthly Loan Payment are positively correlated with one another (The higher the Loan Original Amount the higher the expected Monthly Loan Payment). The Loan Original Amount and the Number of investors are slightly positively correlated. I likewise noticed that BorrowerRate is not in correlation with any of the other numeric variables as I expected it to be in correlation with the loan amount. I observed a huge decrease in loans amount between the fourth quarter of the year 2008 and the second quarter of the year 2009 (This is due to the Financial Crisis in the US during this period). The amount of loans also increases by year from 2010 to 2014. I further noticed that most of the borrowers are from California (CA) and the total amount of loans that were provided to the state is $130,687,003 amounting to approximately 13.9% of the total amount of loans ($940,116,915) given out by the company. I also investigated how the Borrower Rate changes with the year. I observed a huge increase in Borrower Rate from the year 2005 to the year 2006 and a decrease from the year 2011 to the year 2014.

In conclusion, I proceeded to Multivariate Exploration to investigate further by creating plots of three or more variables to investigate how loans are distributed with time. In this part of the investigation, I observed the following interesting relationships between features. In the year 2010, 12 months and 60 months loans were introduced and 12 months loans were discontinued in the year 2013, with an increase in 12 months loan terms within the period. It also shows the increase in demand for loans from the year 2012 for all loan terms. The introduction of the approval of unverified loans was from the year 2006 with an increase in the loan amount from the year to the year 2006. It also shows that more of the loans are given out to borrowers with verified income amounts. Most of the loans are given out to borrowers with verified income amounts. It also shows a decrease in loan amount from January to June and an increase from August to December. There is a positive correlation between Loan Original Amount and Monthly Loan Payment and an increase in Loan Original Amount and Monthly Loan Payment by Year. Additionally, I found out that 12 months and 60 months loan terms were just introduced in 2010 and that 12 months loans were later terminated in 2013. The company had to stop 12 months of loan terms because most borrowers were unable to repay their loans during this timeframe. Additionally, the variables I involved in my explanatory presentation are "Term", "LoanStatus", "BorrowerState", "StatedMonthlyIncome", "LoanOriginalAmount", "LoanOriginationDate", "LoanOriginationQuarter", "MonthlyLoanPayment".

## Key Insights for Presentation

For the presentation, I focus on just the influence of the Loan Status, Original Amount, Original Date, Original Quarters, Term and the Borrower's State, Monthy Income, and Monthly Loan payment and leave out other unnecessary features. 
First, I looked distribution of Loan Status and create a bar chart of the count of Loan Status to visualize my findings.
Secondly, I observed the distribution of loans by state and create a bar chart of the count of Borrower's States to visualize my findings.
Moreover, I investigated the distribution of the borrower's Stated Monthly Income and created a count bar chart of the borrower's Stated Monthly Income to depict my investigation result.
In Addition, I explore the distribution of the Loan's Original Amount and depict my findings with a bar plot.
Furthermore, I checked for the year (in quarters) that has the highest loan demands and show the result with a line graph.
Additionally, I observed how Loan Original Amount changes by yearly quarters and depict my findings with a line graph of the Loan Original Amount ($) against the Loan Origination Quarter.
Also, I investigated the distribution of loans by state and displayed the result with a bar chart of Total Loan Amount ($) against Borrower State.
Besides, I examine the relationship between Loan Original Amount, Loan Origination Year, and Term and created a line graph of the Loan Original Amount ($) against the Loan Origination Year and used the Term as its hue.
In Conclusion, I investigated The relationship between Loan Original Amount and Monthly Loan Payment with respect to Year and plotted a scatter plot of Monthly Loan Payment ($) against Loan Original Amount ($) with Year as its hue to depict my findings. I've made sure to use different color palettes for each year to make sure it is clear that they're different between plots.
